### August 27th, 2024

Nativism: The philisophical view that certain kinds of knowledge are innate or inborn
- So you are born with innate 'talent' for certain things
Philisophical empiricism: The philisophical view that all knowledge is acquired
through experience.
- Instead of being born with innate 'talent' you aquire this though any experiences you have
Instead of just one of these being true it is most likely a mixture of both.

Fuctionalism: Study how mental abilities allow people to adapt to their enviroments.
- William James kinda the first guy to do some stuff, scientific approach to
studying psychology(he was not very good at the science though).
Structuralism: Analyze the mind by breaking it down into basic components.
- Willhelp Wundt 'father of psychology', first psychology laboratory.

### August 29th, 2024

Scientific method: Principlies about the relationship between ideas and evidence.
Theory: Hypothetical explantion of natural phenomena.
Hypothesis: Prediction made by a theory.
Empirical method: Rules or techniques for observation
- Must use  methods of observations and explanation
- Objective and subjective
- Opinions are always going to be subjective, but an actual test of something will give
objective results.
Operational definition: Specfic, precise procedure where a variable is defined
and measured.
- Define and detect
- Can define things many different ways, important to pick an exact definition
- Might define things in an objective or subjective
Measure: Device that can detect the condition to which an operational definition
refers.
- Validity is how closely related a measurment and a property are related
- Reliablity is how often a measure produces the same measurment, consistency
- Power is how accurate you can be with your data kinda, like if you have a small
sample size in a study that would be an example of not enough power.
Demanded characteristics: An observational setting causing people to act differently,
or act as they think they should.
Naturalistic observation: Hiding the fact that subjects are being observed in a study,
unobtrusively observing people in their natural enviroments.
Observer bias: Expectations can influence the observations being made, influencing
perceptions of reality.
- Double-blind is an observations where the true purpose is hidden from both
the observer and the person being observed.
Correlation: Two variables are correlated when variations in one variable are
synchronuzed with variations in the other variable. Correlation could be strong
or weak.
- Positive correlations is where both varaible increase or decrease together.
- Negative correlation is where one variable might increase while the other
decreases.
Causation: A correlation observed in the world around us.
- Third variable problem is the fact that a relationship between two variables
cannot be inferred from a correlation between them, this is because of the
possibility of a third variable correlation.

### September 5rd, 2024
Neurons: Cells in the nervous system that communicate with one another to preform
information-processing tasks.
Santiago Ramon y Cajal (1852-1934d): First stained neurons in the brain

Types of neurons:
- Sensory neurons: Gather information from external world, sending either directly
to your brain, or through your spinal cord. Like things you hear, see, smell, touch
- Motor neurons interpret what they get from the sensory neurons, carry signals
from the spinal cord to the muscels to produce movement.
- Interneurons: Connect sensory neurons, motor neurons and other interneurons.
- Mirror neurons: Neurons that fire both when the animal is performing the action
and when it observes another animal performing the action. So not necessarily
doing anything, but they will fire when we see someone else performing an action.
Mirror neurons can also send signals to the emotional part of our brains, helping
things like empathy, and learning. Mirror neurons are only helpful in a social
context.

The resting potential: In the resting state k- molecules flow freely across the cell
membrane, but Na- molecules are kept out, creating a difference in electric charge
between the inside and outside of a neuron's cell membrane. THe inside of the neuron
has a charge of about -70 millivolts relative to the outside, whcih is the potential
energy that will be used to generate the action potential.
The action potential: Electric simulation of the neuron shts down the K-
channels and opens the NA- channels, allowing NA- to rush in and increase the
positive charge inside the axon relative to the outside, triggering the action
potential.
The imbalance in ions from the action potential is reversed by an active chemical
"pump" in the cell membrane that mives Na- outside the axon and moves K- inside
the axon. The neuron can now generate another action potential.

Types of functions of neurotransmitters:
- Acetylocholine (ACh): involved in a number of functions including voluntary
motor control. Found in a lot of organs, associated with attention, learning, sleeping
ect. Also been associated with alzheimers.
- Dopamine (DA): Regulates motor behavior, motivation, pleasure, and emotional
arousal. Associated with parkinsons.
- Glutamate: major excitatory neurotrasmitter involved in information throughout
the brain.
- Gaba: major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.
Norepinephrine (NE): Influences mood and arousal. Associated with things like
anxiety and depression.
- Serotonin (5-HT): Involved in the regulation of sleep and wakefulness, eating and
aggressive behavior, also highly associated with anxiety and depression. New
research challenges the link between depression and serotonin. Males usually
have more serotonin than women.
- Endorphins: chemicals that act within the pain pathways and emotion centers of
the brain. Like a runners high, kind of like our bodies natural morphine.

### 2024-09-10
Human nervous system
- Nervous system
    - Peripheral
        - Autonomic
            - Sympathetic
            - Parasympathetic
        - Somotic
    - Central (brain and spinal cord)

Hindbrain
- Considered old, does basic stuff

Medulla
- Breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, swallowing

Cerebellum
- Movement, find motor skills

Pons
- Sends info from parts of the brain to other parts

Midbrain
- Tectum - orients organism in the enviroment
- Tegmentum - Movement and arousal
- Still basic, simple animals still have these part of the brain

Forebrain
- Cerebral cortex
     - Connected by the corpus callosum, thick band of fibers that connects the
     two hemisphers.
- Thalamus
    - Relaying sensory information to the brain
    - Allows you to pay attention to differnt things going on
    - You take in so much information, the thalamus decides what you actually
    pay attention to
    - Also important when sleeping, blocks out sensory information while you
    sleep, like if you fall asleep watching something, or fall asleep with your
    eyes open.

The right side of your vision goes to the right hemisphere in your brain, and your
left side goes to the left hemisphere.

Limbic System - motivation, emotion, learning and memory
- Hypothalamus
     - Body temperature, hunger, thirst, sexual behavior
     - Works in conjunction with the pituitary gland
- Pituitary gland
    - Master gland
    - Regulates hormones during puberty
- Hippocampus
    - Really important for memory
    - Transforming short term memory into long term memory
    - Also really important for spacial memory, like your memory of directions
- Amygala
    - Emotional processes and memories (fear)
    - Things that we are cautious of to keep ourselves safe

Cerebral Cortex and Lobes
- Occipital lobe
    - Visual information
    - Does not tell you what you see, but the features of what your see
    - What you see is interpreted in other parts of the brain
- Temporal lobe
    - Responsible for hearing and lagnuage
    - Processes the sound waves, but does recognize voices or understand what it
    is hearing
- Parietal lobe
    - Sensory information like touch
    - Knowing where things are in space
- Frontal lobe
    - Movement, abstract thinking, planning, memory and judgement

Somatosensory and motor cortices
- Motor cortex
    - Areas controlling differnt body parts motor movement
- Sebsory cortex
    - Areas of sensory in differnt parts of the body

Brain plasitcity
- Sensory corices can adapt to change
- The brain is plastic: function that were assigned to certain areas of the brain
may be capable of being reassigned to other areas of the brain to accommodate changing
input from the enviroment
- Greater use of a function may allocate greater space in the cortical map
- Physical exercise can benifit the strength and connection of synapses in the
brain

### 2024-09-12
Consciousness: a persons subjective experience of the world and the mind
Phenomenology: How things seem to the conscious person
Problem of other minds: the fundamental difficulty we have in perceiving the
consciousness of others

Four basic properties of Consciousness
1. Intentionality: being directed toward an object
    - All mental states are intentional
    - Conscious attention is limited
    - This does not last long, for example when reading something boring
    - It is not possible to stay completely focused on one thing for a long time
    - Some things, that we might be interested in, we can maintain intentionality
    for much longer
2. Unity: resistance to division
    - Divided attention
    - Taking everything that is going on in at once.
    - Just like with intentionality, hard to maintain for a long time.
    - It is very hard to pay attention to everything at once, instead of
    multitasking, humans usually just task switch very well.
3. Selectivity: the capacity to include some objects but not others
    - Dichotic listening: a task in which people wearing headphones heard
    different messages presenting to each ear.
    - Cocktail part phenomenon: people tune in one message even while they
    filter out others nearby
4. Transience: the tendency to change
    - Ability to allow your thought to shift from one thing to another
    - Change blindness: the phenomenon that people are ubable to keep track
    of all the information in a typical complex scene

### 2024-09-17
Levels of Consciousness
- Minimal consciousness: a low-level kind of sensory awareness and responsiveness that
occurs when the mind inputs sensation and may output behavior.
    - Kind of like being half awake, when you might wake up and do things, but you
    are not really there, or aware of what you are doing
- Full consciousness: consciousness in which you know and are able to report your
mental state.
    - You are probably at this level most of the time, you know what is going on
    and you know what you are feeling, or your mental state.
- Self-consciousness: a distict level of consciousness in which the persons attention
is drawn to the self as an object.
    - Recongnition of self in mirros by humans and other animals.
    - Evaluate aspects of your self, your attention is being driven inside, 
    self becomes the focus, why are you feeling what your are feeling?
How many emotions do we feel because of ourselves, verses because of societal 
norms? The part that makes you feel bad is because other people think you did
something bad.
"The way we feel about what we do is by who has watched us."

The mirror test
- Used to evaluate animals ability to recognize themselves in a mirror
- Shows how self conscious these animials are
- As children get older, around 18 months, they will be able to recognize themselves
in a mirror.
- Chimpazee's, elephants and dolphins all have the ability to recognize themselves
    - All very social animals, including humans
    - Because of this social aspect, the mirror-neurons are very important

Conscious Contents
- Default mode network
    - Tends to be associated with things like day dreaming, thinking about the self,
    also connected to imaginiation and creativity.
    - Activates when you dont agree with something that is a core belief of yours
        - This suggests that we have a very had time taking in information that goes
        against our beliefs and our identities
- Mental control: the attempt to change conscious states of mind
    - How much can we control what goes on in our minds?
- Thought suppresion: the conscious avoidance of a thought.
    - Can we shift focus? Once we get into a certain state of mind, how well can we
    suppress thoughts, like things we are worried about?
- Ironic processes of mental control: mental processes that can produce ironic 
errors because monitoring for errors can itself produce them.
    - When trying not to think about something, it becomes very hard to do so.

Rebound Effect
- Rebound effect of thought suppression: the tendency of a thought to return to
consciousness with greater frequency following suppression.
    - We have a very hard time trying not to think about things we are trying
    not to think about.

The Unconscious Mind
- Freud's unconscious
    - Dynamic unconscious: an active system encompassing a lifetime of hidden
    memories, the person's deepest instincts and desires, and the person's inner
    stuggle to control these forces; described by Freud
    - Repression: a mental process that removes unacceptable thoughts and memories
    from consciousness
    - Uses an iceberg as a metaphor for this, the unconsious being the bigger but 
    hidden side.
    - Freud did not beleive in accidents or forgetting things, instead that the mind
    unconsiously meant to do everything, with motivation behind it.
- Modern unconscious
    - Cognitive unconscious: the mental processes that give rise to a persons
    thoughts, choices, emotions, and behavior even through they are not experienced
    by the person.
        - Subliminal perception: a thought or behavior that is influenced by 
        stimulu that a person cannot consciously report perceiving; controversial
    - Unconscious processing can help or hurt decision making.

Sleep
- Reversible physiological state
- Daily rest period
- Time spent less responsive to external stimuli
- Deprivation causes a rebound
- Position is a factor

Sleep and Dreaming: Good Night, Mind
- Altered state of consciousness: forms of experience that departs from the normal
subjective experience of the world and the mind
    - Hypnagogic state, hypnopompic state
- Circadian rhythm: a naturally occuring 24-hour cycle
