# Problem 1: Sec 1.7, #4 
## Show that the additive inverse, or negative, of an even number is an even number using a direct proof.
1. Let y be the additive inverse of an even number x
2. $x=2k$ where k is an integer
3. Since y is the additive inverse of x, $y+2k=0$
4. Simplifying, $y=2\cdot (-k)$
5. Let $z=-k$
6. $y=2z$
7. If z is an integer, y must be an even number by definition
# Problem 2: Sec 1.7, #8 
## Prove that if $n$ is a perfect square, then $n + 2$ is not a perfect square.
1. Assuming the contradiction that n is a perfect square and $n+2$ is a perfect square
2. Let $n=a^2$ for some integer a$
3. Then $n+2=a^2+2$
4. Assuming $n+2$ is a perfect square, $n+2=k^2$ for some integer k
5. Considering $a^2-k^2, k^2-a^2=(k+m)(k-m)=(n+2)-n=2$
6. So, $(k+m)(k-m)=2$
7. Since k and m are integers, $(k+m)\text{ and }(k-m)$ must also be integers
8. So the only possible factors are $1\cdot 2$ and $-1\cdot -2$
9. Neither of these factors work since if $k+m=1$ then $k-m$ cannot be 2, and if $k+m=2$, then $k-m$ cannot equal 1, and the same for the negatives
10. This shows a contradiction, if n is a perfect square, then $n+2$ is not a perfect square
# Problem 3: Sec 1.7, #16
## Prove that if x, y, and z are integers and $x + y + z$ is odd, then at least one of x, y, and z is odd.
1. To proof this by contrapositive, assume that if none of x,y, and z are odd, then $x+y+z$ is even
2. Let $x=2a, y=2b, z=2c$ where a, b and c are integers
3. $x+y+z=2a+2b+2c=2(a+b+c)$
4. Since $a+b+c$ must be an integer, by definition $x+y+z$ is even because it is a multiple of 2
5. Therefore, if none of x,y, and z are odd, then $x+y+z$ is even
6. by contrapositive, if x,y, and z are integers and $x+y+z$ is odd, then at least one of x,y, and z is odd
# Problem 4: Sec 1.7, #30
## Prove that $m^2 = n^2$ if and only if $m = n$ or $m = −n$.
If $m=n$ or $m=-n$, then $m^2=n^2$
1. Squaring both sides of $m=n$, you get $m^2=n^2$
2. Squaring both sides of $m=-n$, you get $m^2=-n^2=m^2=n^2$
3. Therefore, if $m=n$ or $m=-n$, then $m^2=n^2$
If $m^2 = n^2$, then $m=n$ or $m=-n$
4. If $m^2=n^2$, $m^2-n^2=0=(m+n)(m-n)=0$
5. $m+n=0$ or $m-n =0$
6. If $m+n=0, m=-n$
7. If $m-n=0, m=n$
8. Therefore, if $m^=n^2$, then $m=n$ or $m=-n$
Since both direction have been proven, $m^2=n^2$ if and only if $m=n$ or $m=-n$
# Problem 5: Sec 1.8, #14
## Show that the product of two of the numbers $65^{1000} − 8^{2001} + 3^{177}, 79^{1212} − 9^{2399} + 2^{2001}$, and $24^{4493} − 5^{8192} + 7^{1777}$ is non negative. Is your proof constructive or nonconstructive? [Hint: Do not try to evaluate these numbers!]
Consider two cases: 
1. Assume at least one of the numbers is 0, so multiplying 0 by any other number results in 0, a nonnegative product
2. None of the numbers are 0 and all numbers are iether postive or negative, If there are two positive numbers, then those numbers will prodice a nonnegative product together, if there are two negative numbers, then those numbers will produce a nonnegative product. If one number is positive, then one other number must be positive, or both are negative. Therefore, there must be a product between two positives or two negatives, resulting in a nonnegative product. if one number is negative, then the other number must be negative, or two must be positive, both resulting in a nonnegative product. This is a non-constructive proof.
# Problem 6: Sec 1.8, #20
## Show that if r is an irrational number, there is a unique integer n such that the distance between r and n is less than $\frac{1}{2}$.
1. For any irration number r, there are two unique integers a and b such that $a < b, |r-a| < 1,|r-b| < 1$. This is because between any two consecutive integers, there lies an irration number.
2. The point directly between a and b can be show as $\frac{a+b}{2}$/ Which is also an integer.
3. Since any integer plus $\frac{1}{2}$ is rational, the irrational number r must be between $a,a+\frac{1}{2},\text{ and } b(cannot include these number as they are rational).
4. All of these spaces are less than $\frac{1}{2}$ away from a or b$
5. Therefore, if r is an irration number, there is a unique integer n such that the distance between r and n is less than $\frac{1}{2}$.
# Problem 7: Sec 1.8, #26
## The quadratic mean of two real numbers x and y equals $\sqrt{\frac{x^2+y^2}{2}}$. By computing the arithmetic and quadratic means of different pairs of positive real numbers, formulate a conjecture about their relative sizes and prove your conjecture. 

| x               | 1                                | 2                                | 1                            | 3                                |
| --------------- | -------------------------------- | -------------------------------- | ---------------------------- | -------------------------------- |
| y               | 2                                | 3                                | 1                            | 4                                |
| Quadratic mean  | $\sqrt{\frac{1^2+2^2}{2}}=1.581$ | $\sqrt{\frac{2^2+3^2}{2}}=2.549$ | $\sqrt{\frac{1^2+1^2}{2}}=1$ | $\sqrt{\frac{3^2+4^2}{2}}=3.535$ |
| Arithmetic mean | $\frac{1+2}{2}=1.5$              | $\frac{2+3}{2}=2.5$              | $\frac{1+1}{2}=1$            | $\frac{3+4}{2}=3.5$              |

# Problem 8: Sec 1.8, #32
## Prove that there are no solutions in integers x and y to the equation $2x^2 + 5y^2 = 14$.
Proof by contradiction:
1. Assume you found a pair (x,y) for the equation
2. 14 is even
3. $2x^2$ is even by definition
4. Since 14 and $2x^2$ are even, $5y^2$ must be even
5. Since $5y^2$ is even, y must be even.
6. Therefore, $y=2z$ for some integer z
7. $2x^2+20z^2=14$ simplifies to $x^2+10z^2=7$
8. $10z^2 > $if $z\neq 0$
9. Therefore, z must be 0, showing that $x^2=7$
10. This is a contradiction that there are integers x and y to solve the equation
11. Therefore, there are no solutions in integers x and y to the equation $2x^2+5y^2=14$
# Challenge 1: Sec 1.8, #36 
## Prove that $\sqrt[3]{2}$ is irrational
1. Assume $\sqrt[3]{2}$ is rational
2. So it can be express as a ratio of two integers, $\frac{a}{b}$. which are rational numbers
3. Then, $\sqrt[3]{2}=\frac{p}{q}$
4. So, $2=\frac{p^3}{q^3}$
5. And, $p^3=2q^3$
6. $2q^3$ is even by definition
7. So, $p^3$ must be even
8. And p must be even
9. Thus, $p=2n$ for some integer n
10. Therefore, $(2n)^3=2q^3$
11. $8n^3=2q^3$
12. $q^3=4n^3$
13. $4n^3$ is even by definition
14. So, $q^3$ must be even
15. So q must be even
16. Since q and p are both even, they are not coprime, creating a contradiction
17. So, $\sqrt[3]{2}$ must be irrational.
